Descartes' decision to "devote [himself] sincerely and without reservation to the general demolition of [his] opinions" was aimed at establishing "what was stable and likely to last" by way of knowledge about himself and his opinions, the world he lived in and particularly what he refers to as 'the sciences'[1]. The method he chooses is to put everything into doubt — what his senses tell him, what he experiences in sleeping and dreaming — to the point that he even speculates that an 'evil deceiver' might be behind the knowledge he has of himself and the world. But, on further reflection, he comes to the conclusion that, fundamentally, he is a thinking thing: "I think, I exist," he says in the Second Meditation[2]. This he cannot doubt and therefore the capacity to think becomes the foundation that is 'stable and likely to last'. The 'I' '"necessarily exists" he says, even if at this point in his meditations he does not have a sufficient understanding of what this means. He begins to explore himself and the world on this basis.
Having meditated on a piece of wax — which he can touch, see and picture in his imagination — he concludes that the perception of bodies (in this case a piece of wax) "derives not from their being touched or seen but from their being understood"[3]. For Descartes, there is a clear separation between mind and body and for him, it is the mind or intellect which ultimately provides the means he has of knowing not just 'bodies' in the world, but himself: "very little about corporeal things [that] is truly perceived, whereas much more is known about the human mind", he says in the Fourth Meditation[4]. In the Sixth Meditation, he says that material things are at least capable of existing in that they are" the subject matter of pure mathematics" — things he can perceive "clearly and distinctly"[5] and it is by this route that he can know them.
He goes on in the Sixth Meditation to say that his own body is "simply an extended, non-thinking thing", whereas the 'I' that thinks is "simply a thinking, non-extended thing": accordingly, he concludes — without doubt now — that, "it is certain that I am really distinct from my body and can exist without it"[6]. He describes imagination and sensory perception as "special modes of thinking" which could not exist "without an intellectual substance to inhere in". But, it would appear, there are very unreliable connections between these modes of thinking and the more foundational intellect — between the unreliable senses and imagination and the clear and distinct ideas of the mind.[7] In the end, Descartes believes that God, who is "not a deceiver", would not 'transmit' false ideas via the body and imagination to the mind. In this way, Descartes can "attain the truth" even in the face of the unreliability of some of his faculties and "knowledge of the truth ... seems to belong to the mind alone, not to the combination of mind and body"
In Descartes philosophy therefore there is a split between subject and object, between the 'I' and things outside of the 'I'. He gives primacy to the intellect which has no direct access to the outside world. As Dreyfus says, "modern scepticism about the existence of the external world begins with Descartes"[9] since, if Descartes is correct, all we can know is what is in our own minds; we are sealed within this chamber. In this scenario there is every possibility that we would have the same experience of the world as a 'brain in a vat' as we do with a brain in a body.
Merleau-Ponty, in contrast to Descartes, gives primacy to perception as the way to know ourselves and the world we live in: "When Descartes tell us that the existence of visible things is doubtful, but that our vision, when considered as a mere thought of seeing is not in doubt, he takes up an untenable position". For Merleau-Ponty it would not make sense "to revert with Descartes from things to thought about things". It would not make sense for him to say that the perception could not be doubted but the thing perceived can be doubted: "to see is to see something": this is of the essence of vision — to see something. If we doubt the presence of something we 'see' then neither can I be certain of my thought about that. This is the untenable position he ascribes to Descartes' doubting of his capacity to know things. But if I grasp my thought with certainty this involves the assumption of the existence of the thing towards which that thought is projected, Merleau-Ponty contends.
What then is perception for Merleau-Ponty? "Perception is the background from which all acts stand out and is presupposed by them". It provides us with 'access to the truth', he says. We must not "wonder whether we really perceive a world... the world is what we perceive" and later he sums up by saying "the world is not what I think, but what I live through"[10]. The world is not an object; it is the situation in which we as embodied beings find ourselves and towards which all our efforts strain or intend, — "the subject as a process of transcendence towards the world". Explaining transcendence, he says that it means "we do not possess [things]... I blindly exert their bare existence"
For Merleau-Ponty, "the certainty of some external thing is involved in the very way in which the sensation is articulated and unfolded before me: it is a pain in the leg" (his italics)[12]. I do not just have pain, but I have pain in a very particular place, in my leg. But "the body is not an object... I have no means of knowing it except by living it, losing myself in it".[13] My body is 'an original intentionality', a manner of relating to 'objects of knowledge'. We do not have a thought about the body or have it as an idea, we experience it and through it we experience the world. Descartes, he claims, was aware of this reality but subordinated this kind of knowledge to the understanding we have of it, through the idea we have of it — we have true knowledge 'through the mind alone' Descartes says. For Merleau-Ponty, consciousness is neither a 'passive noting' of an event that leaves me in doubt of what I perceive nor a ' constituting power' that links up with the object without leaving its inner world he says. On the contrary, I "reassure myself that I see by seeing this or that".[14] This is because, in essence, our existence, he says, is 'open to the world'. We are open to the world because we are embodied. For Merleau-Ponty there is no subject-object divide, no mind body separation and there is no doubt but that we are beings-in-the-world.
We can become more aware of this thoroughgoing being-in-the-world through the Husserlian reduction which "slackens our intentional threads which attach us to the world and thus brings them to our notice". Through this process we can learn about "the unmotivated upsurge of the world"[15]. We learn that the world 'is always there'. No Cartesian doubt here about the existence of the things outside the cogito. Ironically, the reduction and slackening of the 'natural attitude' is somewhat analogous to the Cartesian method of doubt, even if the result is quite different: both are aimed at clearing away the 'natural attitude' in the case of Merleau-Ponty and 'to demolish everything completely and start again from the foundations' in the case of Descartes so that there can be a fresh start or new look at what we take for granted or gloss over as unquestioned common sense. In this way, we can begin to deal with the issues of certainty and doubt about the knowledge we have of ourselves and the world.
For Merleau-Ponty, unlike for Descartes, truth does not inhabit the 'inner man' for "man is in the world, and only in the world does he know himself".[16] The cogito, for Merleau-Ponty, "must reveal me in a situation". It is not that we cannot distinguish ourselves from the world and from things he says, but the world is the permanent horizon of all that we know, in relation to which we are always situating ourselves. As sentient subjects, we do not simply posit things as objects, but enter into a sympathetic relationship with them, make them our own as when I look at the blue sky and allow my consciousness to be "saturated with this limitless blue".[17] Things exist not in consciousness but for consciousness.
It is not possible, he says, to 'lay bare and unfold' all the presuppositions that may be found in my experiences; these have a whole 'sedimentary history' which relate not just to the genesis of thought, but which, perhaps more importantly, determine its significance. It is not possible, he says, to produce evidence for the 'truth' of what we perceive. For that, it would be necessary, he says, " instead of being myself, I should become purely and simply one who knows myself and that the world should have ceased to exist around me in order to become purely an object before me"[18]. We have to come to 'rest in' self evident truths — giving up every notion of making them explicit. These may be contingent but they are 'something rather than nothing'; de facto rather than de jure. This, Merleau-Ponty says, is about restoring to the cogito "a temporal thickness... — if I think, it is because I plunge myself on into provisional thoughts"[19].
Merleau-Ponty points out that even in the case of doubting, as Descartes performs it, to doubt is to doubt something; the very experiencing of doubting brings a certainty — the certainty of doubting. If Descartes tried to verify the reality of his doubt, he would be launched into an infinite regress — what is doubted is the thought about doubting, then the thought about that thought and so on. He goes on to say, "he who doubts cannot, while doubting, doubt that he doubts. Doubt... is not an abolition of my thought but a pseudo-nothingness, for I cannot extricate myself from my being; my act of doubting creates the possibility of certainty... it occupies me and I am committed to it"[20]. The Cartesian proposition should, he says, really be simply ' I think' or 'something appears to me'; this is sufficient — in order to know that we think, it is necessary that we actually should think; this 'halts doubt in its tracks'.
Descartes, Merleau-Ponty says, is not simply thinking he is doubting, he is performing the act of doubting. This is what Merleau-Ponty calls the 'blind plunge into doing': "hence it is not because I think I am that I am certain of my existence.... my love, hatred and will are not certain as mere thoughts about loving, hating and willing... I am quite sure because I perform them"[21]. In this way, he says we accomplish our own existence. He also says that "in the proposition, I think, I am, the two assertions are to be equated with each other, otherwise there would be no cogito".[22] This is not to say that my existence is brought down to the consciousness I have of it, he continues, rather the reverse; consciousness is re-integrated into existence.
Continuing his theme of certainty and doubt, Merleau-Ponty says that the very foundations of certainty arise in intuitive thought; "formal relations are first presented to us crystallized in some particular thing"[23] — in a particular triangle for instance. I have a way of relating to and describing a triangle which is based on how I am situated in a particular perceptual field — what is considered to be 'up' or 'down', 'right' or 'left'. The concepts of angle and direction have meaning in so far as I place myself at a point and so on. A triangle is not then a collection of objective characteristics but expresses a 'certain modality of my hold upon the world'. It is through this kind of perceptual consciousness that we arrive at the essence or eidos of things; the thing — the triangle — displays itself to me — I perceive it through my body and in projecting myself towards the thing, there is "a completed synthesis in terms of which we have defined the thing", he says.[24] The description of a triangle is thus an act of productive imagination according to Merleau-Ponty, and the triangle is not, as Descartes asserts in the Fifth Meditation, "a form... which is immutable and eternal and not invented by me or dependent on my mind".[25]
For Merleau-Ponty, we do not know the world and ourselves as empiricism would have it through observation nor as rationalism would have it from a priori knowledge — these are 'derivative sign languages' — but through "direct contact with our existence. Self-consciousness is the very being of mind in action"[26]. What the cogito 'retrieves' he says, is not a coordinated pulling together of the separate events of my experience, but "the one single experience inseparable from myself... which is engaged in making itself progressively explicit... The primary truth in indeed 'I think', but only provided that we understand thereby 'I belong to myself' while belonging to the world".[27] As we have seen, Descartes' meditations on 'I think, I am' take us away from the world and from our own bodies, into the separate and more certain world of the mind, which, according to him, provides a certain means of knowing ourselves and the world, each philosopher claims in different ways.
For all the meditations, thought and wresting with certainty and doubt about what we know about ourselves, about the world, about truth, in both Descartes and Merleau-Ponty, with their attempts to provide coherent answers to the questions raised, a sense of uncertainty hangs over both of their works. For Descartes, despite his certainty that it is through this mind alone that he can have true knowledge, ultimately he relies on a God he cannot know with certainty to ensure that the whole structure coheres. In addition, with the clear separation he outlines between mind and body, there is no direct way for humans to experience the world, no certainty that what we see touch or smell, for instance, actually exists in the way that we take for granted in our everyday lives; in a sense then, we are thoroughly thrown out of the world, out of our bodies; scepticism, not certainty, is born.
In Merleau-Ponty's work, while the world is 'always already there' and as embodied beings we are thrown irretrievably into the world — simultaneously belonging to myself and to the world — moving through the world and 'having' it, there is a theme or flavour of uncertainty about what we 'have' running through the work as well. The perceived admits of 'ambiguous, the shifting and is shaped by the context' he says. Our thoughts and words are described as 'outrunning' themselves; the word 'fleeting' is frequently applied to our experience. While the idea of an object as being 'in-itself-for-me' opens up the possibility of subject-object dialogue, I see or experience things from the perspective of an embodied, living being; things are 'up' or 'down' according to where I am situated; experience is always a becoming, not a fixed 'having'. This 'uncertainty' is not necessarily a problem for Merleau-Ponty; we first and foremost live our lives without reflection; the latter is, so to speak, added on. But this world has meaning for us when I engage with it through my body. We come to know ourselves and our world through living through it, not by first reflecting on it, not by first doubting if any of what we experience is certain: the 'thisness' of the world is certain if, at the same time, not fixed.
There is a stark contrast then between Descartes' thinking thing and Merleau-Ponty's embodied being. It is the difference between understanding and engagement, between clear and distinct ideas and ideas that are ambiguous and shifting, between the life of disembodied mind and the life of the embodied mind, between 'I think' and 'I am', between doubt and certainty, between what we know and what we experience, between immanence and transcendence: these are some of the main issues that Merleau-Ponty points to and wrestles with in his critique of Descartes'cogito in his work, Phenomenology of Perception.
I think of personal consulting and much of what others call therapy as like dancing with another person. Sometimes you lead, sometimes you follow and sometimes the hardest part to learn is how to stay out of your partners way. You must understand your partners way of moving very well indeed if you are to follow it, move with it and know what will embellish and accentuate and what will interrupt.
What philosophers do is listen to and think about other philosophers and their job is to pit their minds against the minds of some of the greatest intellects our civilisation has known, 'understand which is not the same as memorising', what those thinkers did say, would say, avoided saying, assumed or presupposed; who influenced them and how; which ideas connect with which; and how it all fits together. They must be able to do this so well that they can take the part of any major philosopher, know that philosopher so well that they can become him or her 'from the inside'.
All academic disciplines breed a degree of self criticism that goes with a sense of never knowing as much as one ought to know, but this is especially true of philosophy which has historically been one of the most self critical and introspective of disciplines. Indeed the popular image of not being good for much owes a great deal to philosophers criticisms of themselves from Socrates on, and perhaps the world at large would not have had enough imagination to change the discipline with being useless if the philosophers had not themselves intimated as much.
Granted philosophers tend to be 'out of touch' with their feelings — a drawback in a consultant— which would be shared by representatives of other disciplines such as psychiatry, psychology or medicine, but they are well used to keeping themselves in focus, to bringing a question back to 'what do 1 make out of all this? How does what I'm saying and what I'm trying to understand in this other person match with what makes sense to me?' (the first person is often offensive to many academics).
Hoping for the best on that score 1 would venture that the philosophers habits of self criticism and ongoing evaluation of one's own views are a decided asset in a personal consultant. Perhaps the posture of the confident physician is more 'curative' in the realm of medicine, but in the larger enterprise of personal reflections and consulting I think we best invite self scrutiny in others by modelling this in our own conduct.
This paper will consider the concept of freedom. Freedom is viewed as a positive term with regards to the human condition and associated with the notions of freewill, agency and autonomy. However, rather than assuming a socio-political perspective, this piece of work will examine the concept of freedom on an existential level; particularly the work of Jean Paul Sartre who asserted that 'Man is condemned to be free', inferring a darker, more negative aspect of freedom. Hence, I intend to highlight the illusion, that although through the existential lens I actually possess freedom, this realisation produces the experience of anxiety within me; as a result the inevitable consequence is the adoption of bad faith through which I ultimately deny my freedom. Furthermore, even when endeavouring to act in good faith, this becomes a paradox in that it also appears to be classed as an act of bad faith, so ultimately through the eyes of Sartre, bad faith is an inescapable consequence of the human condition.
According to Sartre, I am condemned to be free due to the nature of my ontological being. Sartre proposes two primary modes of being; being-in-itself (en soi) and being-for-itself (pour soi). Being-in-itself is exactly that, the being of things or objects for consciousness, being-in-itself is full of itself and without lack; it is changeless. This mode of being is trans-phenomenal or beyond our experience as we can never describe it directly only as phenomenon; what something is in-itself always remains hidden. Being-for-itself is essentially the mode of human being; it is aware of itself, thinks about itself and ultimately has a relation with itself.[1]
Reversing the traditional ontology of being, Sartre posits consciousness as being nothingness, and that which consciousness is conscious of, having being.[2] Sartre's philosophy is heavily influenced by Husserl preferring the concept of the phenomenological approach with human consciousness at its foundation. Husserl posited that a fundamental property of consciousness is intentionality; intentionality relates to the movement of consciousness which moves out of itself resulting in it being conscious 'of' something. Therefore for Sartre, consciousness (for-itself) is an active and dynamic energy which directs itself outwards into the world at large in an attempt to become something.[3]
Sartre asserts that man is fundamentally free; freedom[4] lies in the permanent possibility that things might be different. As documented consciousness is always conscious of something and by itself is nothing, thus, it maintains the ability to negate the world by making plans and envisioning other possibilities. Sartre believed that an individual is forever seeking to discover explanations and reasons for their existence within the world in effect searching for an a priori meaning; however, one is not available as the for-itself generates meaning via its intentional consciousness, there is no such thing as human nature or a fixed sense of self encompassed within the axiom by Sartre that 'existence precedes essence'.
However, when employing the term 'freedom', Sartre does not proclaim total or absolute freedom, as in reality there are certain aspects of human existence which are beyond our realm of control. Therefore, allowing for this Sartre envisions a dual nature of freedom encompassing the co-existence of facticity and transcendence. Facticity describes the given facts of one's situation; this includes one's past which has shaped who and what one is in the present moment. Facticity ultimately defines oneself up to that particular point in time. There is no rhyme or reason to one's facticity and for Sartre we have to accept responsibility for this and as a result are then free to make choices against the distinct background which we find ourselves with; ultimately this cannot be changed so should therefore be realised.
Conversely, transcendence[5] relates to the various possibilities available to us within the given limits of our facticity. As established the for-itself is based upon intentional consciousness directing itself outwards in order to become something; therefore it is constantly engaged in the process of transcendence. The for-itself is in essence free and this allows it to re-create itself on a continuous basis. One's acts define them; an object (being-in-itself) simply 'is' whereas 'I' (being-for-itself) exist by constantly defining myself during every moment in time. Consciousness projects itself forward at all times towards the future therefore can never become a static entity (being-in-itself).[6] Hence, for Sartre I am a project with the freedom and ability to constantly relinquish my past and recreate it through actions: 'transcend itself.'[7]
However; anxiety is the basic experience of affective expression which accompanies any increase in existential awareness.[8] Through the existential perspective there is no rationale for one to exist, with one's being continually in need of justification: neither is there a fixed sense of self to fall back on. Ultimately, existential anxiety and angst appear to be a side effect of the development of consciousness.[9] The concept of freedom triggers anxiety because it incorporates ultimate responsibility for oneself regarding being-in-the-world, along with varying degrees of uncertainty associated with the act of choosing. In being free to choose I am at the same time renouncing choice, for every yes there must be a no. Each and every decision eliminates options, hence the possibility that the choice I make may be the wrong one.[10] The necessity for an individual to make choices is at the centre of existence and being. The existentialist realises that as well as making these choices; more anxiety provoking is the fact that any decision made can only be considered temporary or provisional.[11] Therefore, in order to alleviate angst and anxiety which are experienced by an individual, Sartre posits the concept of mauvaise foi or bad faith; a form of self-deception[12] considered to be the deliberate and motivated aversion of particular facts by an individual, due to the experience of angst and anxiety associated with acknowledging the reality of a particular situation or experience.[13]
On a basic level, the way Sartre views the construction and processing of consciousness and awareness in relation to the human individual is also significant to the facilitation of bad faith. Sartre proposes a duality of consciousness; pre-reflective and reflective. The pre-reflective mode of consciousness describes consciousness in its raw state which is intentional and directed outwards towards objects in the world, whereas the reflective mode represents consciousness taking for its object its own actions; in essence self-reflection. One way in which bad faith can begin to occur is evident in this dichotomy between pre-reflective and reflective consciousness, as although consciousness is always self-aware it is not always self-reflective.[14]
Hence, via cultivating a systematic bias in adopting either pre-reflective or reflective modes of consciousness when executing actions can as a result distort the true nature of an act or representation of oneself; a misinterpretation of reality. When engaging in shameful behaviour if I opt to remain in a pre-reflective mode of consciousness, I therefore direct attention outwards so as to not reflect and identify with it. Conversely, should I perform an act which may be considered noble, via the adoption of a reflective mode of consciousness I can in turn revel in the acclaim and pride allowing bad faith to enhance my personal view of my character or actions.[15]
On a deeper level, the central principle involved in the formation of bad faith is the pursuit of fundamental projects, these influence how an individual organises and interprets their experience throughout their lives. 'According to the existentialist orientation, if one peels away the layers of oneself, all that is revealed at the core of one's being is pure nothingness: one is a pro-ject.'[16] As documented the for-itself is in essence free and this allows it to project and recreate itself on a continuous basis. 'Every little project is an expression of the fundamental project. Every desire, every act and each single tendency of the subject, reveals the whole person: the project is the expression of the relationship between freedom and the world.'[17] However, for Sartre, these fundamental projects although freely chosen are not necessarily acknowledged or known by the individual concerned. The explanation of how this is possible is down to the distinction between thetic or positional awareness and non-thetic or non-positional awareness. To be aware of something positionally is to focus upon it directly. In contrast, to be aware of something non-positionally is to be aware of something, but not focus on it directly.
Therefore, Sartre argues that the underlying reasons for an individual's behaviour is not down to unconscious drives and motives, but rather the projects the individual is non-thetically aware of pursuing. As stated, to be aware of something thetically is to focus upon it directly. Furthermore, this then enables an individual to formulate beliefs and make inferences about it. Whereas, to be aware of something non-thetically is to be aware of something but not focus on it directly which then does not allow for such beliefs and inferences to be made. However, significantly, this non-thetic awareness can still guide action: For Sartre, an individual is always aware of much more than what they are thetically aware of, or in other words directly focusing on.[18] Hence, within an individual is the inevitable ambiguity involved in relation to the experience of perception. It naturally involves the selection of certain aspects in my field of attention to come to the forefront and the relegation of others to the background. This organisation is dependent on my interests and projects which, ultimately involve a bias and therefore guide my focus and behaviour.[19]
To illustrate, take a mountain. If my goal were to scale the mountain, I may focus upon the height and terrain as obstacles to practically overcome. However, if I intend to just take photos of the mountain, the height and terrain are not as important as the location and aesthetics involved for achieving a satisfactory picture. All factors are always present, however, my understanding and interpretation is determined by my freedom through its chosen project.
Therefore, the core of bad faith can be viewed as a rejection by consciousness of acceptance of responsibility for the world in which it is situated in, and as a consequence refusal to attend to and furthermore, sufficiently reflect upon, the fundamental projects of consciousness which impact upon an individual's interpretation of reality.[20] What I choose to do is never beyond my conscious responsibility; the aspects of choice, freewill and purpose are paramount. So what happens if I attempt to renounce bad faith and act in 'good faith'? Drawing upon Sartre's example of the homosexual and his friend the critic I will illustrate how even this path appears paradoxical and ultimately leads to bad faith.
Take a man who denies being homosexual despite admitting to consistent homosexual acts throughout his past. He is guilty of bad faith because although he acknowledges all the facts which are levied at him, he still refuses to draw from them the conclusion which they impose. On the other hand, his friend, the critic or as Sartre puts it 'the champion of sincerity', strives for good faith and urges the homosexual to face up to what he has been. However, the critic is also in bad faith, as he demands that his friend constitute himself as an object or thing, denying his friends freedom in order that he can judge him.[21] Hence, it is apparent that I also fall into bad faith if I adopt 'one or both of two dishonest positions about reality: If I pretend to be free in a world without facts or to be a fact in a world without freedom.'[22]
Therefore, although unavoidable, rather than viewing bad faith as a negative consequence of freedom, I propose it can be considered as an essential and necessary concept, with regard to the human condition. Arguably, much of human society is built around the concept of bad faith, in that it possesses socio and cultural norms and roles which individuals adopt or adhere to in order to successfully function on a daily basis. Furthermore, without bad faith I would forever be living in an uncertain world, enduring a permanent state of anxiety, which over a period of time would become exhausting and debilitating. Just because I may act in bad faith at one moment in time does not mean I will always continue to do so. In effect, bad faith enables me to deal with what I can cope with at that particular point in time, until a time arises when I can face an alternative interpretation of reality and act upon that instead. Ultimately, the for-itself consists of intentional consciousness possessing the capacity to choose; as such, it would be contradictory for there to be objective rules or laws governing freedom, therefore, I believe the for-itself chooses bad faith out of an act of necessity in order to survive human existence which it experiences as an embodied form.
Therefore, from Heidegger's perspective, a thorough philosophical investigation is required in order to reveal the ontological presuppositions of any ontic knowledge attained in an attempt to reveal and clarify the nature and basic conceptualisations of that particular domain. In his magnum opus Being and Time Heidegger documents his analysis concerning his phenomenological based thesis of 'Being' employing the concept of a temporally finite entity termed 'Dasein' (which translates as 'being there') to represent the human condition. He asserts that; 'Dasein is an entity, which does not just occur among other entities. Rather it is distinguished by the fact that, in its very Being, that Being is an issue for it.'[2]
Subsequently, he proposes a fundamental ontology is necessary in which Dasein is considered as an ontological being; in that it is concerned with the nature of its own being, of what it is along with what its existence means. It is holistic in nature and ultimately situated within a world of which it is an intrinsic part, it is involved and engaged in the world and is not to be viewed as a separate entity located in an area of space.[3] 'There is no such thing as side-by-side-ness of an entity called Dasein with another entity called 'world'.'[4] Hence when examining it, it cannot take a detached view of itself as the empirical based scientific paradigm assumes on performing such a task. Separating mind and body creating a subjective realm which relates to an external objective world as the Cartesian model does, is considered a theoretical move by Heidegger with primary being forwarded as more of a basic notion. Dasein represents this fundamental lack of separation; to be human is to be relationally embedded in the everyday world.[5] 'The body and mind participate equally in the act of existence: they are different aspects of Dasein's response to being, different but not apart.'[6] Although human existence is qualitatively different from other objects within the world in that we are self-interpreting and meaning making creatures, it must be emphasised that we are 'thrown' into a world with a mind and body. Consequently, when we live in the world the world lives within us, it is ultimately a constitutive phenomenon; 'being-in-the-world.'[7] 'The compound expression 'Being-in-the-world' indicates in the very way we have coined it, that it stands for a unitary phenomenon. This primary datum must be seen as a whole.'[8]
Thus, Dasein embodies a particular way of existing which is different from other objects located in the world. Objects in the world are determinate possessing distinctive properties, whereas Dasein has no fixed essence, containing no such properties, Dasein constantly projects itself forward into the future — a 'potentiality-for-being'; in effect a myriad of possibilities defined by the way in which an individual chooses to be within the context they find themselves.[9] 'Being towards one's ownmost potentiality-for-being means that in each case Dasein is already ahead of itself in its being. Dasein is always 'beyond itself'.'[10] Furthermore; 'As long as it is, it is projecting. As long as it is, Dasein always has understood itself and always will understand itself in terms of possibilities.'[11]
Accordingly, the concept of authenticity derives from the terms 'own' and 'possession'; essentially a self which has explicitly grasped itself. This refers to the capacity or potentiality to being open to its own being.[13] However, also present within this is the propensity to cut the self off from any experiences which are considered threatening, puzzling or uncontrollable, via dispersing itself into the 'Das Man'[14] (which translates as 'they').[15] In this form 'Dasein stands in subservience to the others. It itself is not; the others have taken its being away from it.'[16] Dasein's default mode of being-in-the-world is to exist in this inauthentic state, ultimately characterised by choosing not to choose itself as a being for whom being is an issue. In this inauthentic mode, Dasein flows along passively 'falling' into the superficial world of the 'they-self' in which Daseins' understanding is achieved and embodied through 'everyday idle talk.'[17] Authenticity and individuality is often not achieved because we are lost in others or lost in things. Individuals want to be told what to think and feel or how to respond and act.[18]
So, in order to attain authentic being an epiphany or enlightening experience is necessary via which Dasein can be liberated from falling and its lostness in the they-self, as a result it faces up to the ultimate conditions of existence, (essentially the nothingness at the root of its being) and takes responsibility for its being-the-world. The world is never encountered in a neutral mode, so to facilitate how Dasein engages with its environment Heidegger posits moods as primordial forms of attunement or orientations to the world which precede cognitions and behaviour.[20]
Therefore, with regards to being-in-the-world, Dasein and the world cannot be separated and are always in relationship; attunement refers to an individual's relatedness to the world via which Dasein bases and forms its being. However, not all moods can be considered equal with many e.g. love, happiness, boredom actually restricting or limiting ones' awareness, maintaining the illusion of 'Das man' and thus failing to provide existential insights into Dasein's fundamental nature of being-in-the-world.[22]
Significantly, as a result of the 'throwness' and freedom associated with the nature of existence in the world, a perpetual state of existential angst will be present within Dasein's being-in-the-world. In order to accomplish a comprehensive phenomenological analysis of Dasein Heidegger proposes that anxiety or angst is the mood capable of revealing its structural makeup in its entirety; anxiety exposes the unstable and indefinite reality of existence.[23]
Whereas in the modern social arena anxiety is considered as a psychological disorder to be treated or managed, conversely via adopting Heidegger's perspective, anxiety can be considered as a natural and inevitable aspect of Dasein's being and existence and hence should be viewed as a positive reaction to being-in-the-world. This in turn can then be utilised as a reliable source of information necessary in the quest for establishing a more authentic way of living; it is through anxiety that we become aware of the nature of Dasein's being-in-the-world. In essence, anxiety illuminates and exposes the paradoxical nature of existence; the constant tension between the freedom of possibility and the facticity of our being-in-the-world that we cannot change including the threat of finitude and non-being.[25]
An important distinction to be made here is that anxiety is not to be confused with fear: At the heart of fear is presence, whereas conversely, anxiety is foundered upon absence. Both can be considered responses to a threat, however, fear is viewed as more of a response to a specific threat, whereas anxiety is in essence objectless and more generalised inducing a crisis of meaning.[27][28]
It must also be stressed that inauthenticity is not necessarily considered to be a negative or dysfunctional mode of being-in-the-world, even though it may act as a barrier to one's' continual reflection regarding potentiality-for-being. 'The inauthenticity of Dasein does not signify a 'lesser' being or 'lower' degree of being.'[30] In fact, immersion into the 'they-self' is actually considered to be inevitable and unavoidable to some degree, as in actuality one does share many common aspects of humanity. How an individual functions within the social world they are thrown into involves a multitude of behavioural norms and cultural expectations.[31]
Therefore, although the existential experiences of anxiety, isolation and meaninglessness are assuaged via following the crowd, it is evident that one needs to realise that being-in-the-world is heavily influenced and indeed constructed around their viewpoints and demands. Heidegger suggests that attunement based upon anxiety will result in Dasein's inauthentic existence being disrupted, and hence an individual no longer feeling comfortable with its place and ultimately their being-in-the-world. As a consequence, the idle talk of the they-self which once gave existence its motivation and meaning is no longer satisfactory; effectively Dasein is brought face to face with itself and its own potentiality-for-being-in-the-world.[33]
The most extreme experience of anxiety posited by Heidegger is death angst, and hence the fundamental philosophical issue in need of exploration in order for an individual to achieve authentic being-in-the-world is one's death. Heidegger believed that 'in Dasein there is undeniably a constant 'lack of totality' which finds an end with death.'[34] Within the everyday falling mode of existence, Dasein consistently overlooks the existential significance of this phenomenon, the everyday faceless collective and public world once again provide interpretations through idle talk in which one is convinced to view death apathetically, as a far off future event and not of immediate concern; in effect inauthentic being-towards-death views death as a remote occurrence, posing little threat to one's being-in-the-world in the present.
However, this represents a false sense of security, as stated, a vital component required for an individual to embark upon the path to authentic living, is actually the experience of anxiety encountered within their life. Via this realisation an individual's awareness can be increased, and as a result releases one from the false worldview promoted by 'them'. In reality, death is always a genuine possibility in the present and via allowing Das man to tranquillize our death awareness, Dasein will ultimately be denied totality of its own existence, and as a result be alienated from its own unified being. Dasein must incorporate the insight gained via the experience of anxiety and cultivate it to actively engage with the responsibility of its own death, recognising this as the most integral aspect concerning its authentic comportment.[35]
The paradox presented regarding the concept of death is that Dasein is ontological in nature endeavouring to understand itself fully and in its entirety. However, Dasein exists in a state of flux, forever projecting itself upon future possibilities available to it; effectively the 'not-yet'. 'It is essential to the basic constitution of Dasein that there is constantly something to be settled.'[37] Therefore, as long as Dasein exists it has not-yet reached its end, the only time it reaches a state of total completion is through cessation, which then equates to Dasein not 'being there' thus incapable of relating to or comprehending itself as a whole. Here the phenomenological approach emphasises Dasein's capacity to allow phenomena to disclose themselves as they are in themselves through its encounters with them. However, although Dasein can experience the phenomenon of death via death of another, this still does not grant access to the nature of Dasein's being-in-the-world in its wholeness; this can only be achieved through my relation to my own death. Therefore, authentic being-towards-death attempts to reveal Dasein's potentiality-for-being via disclosing itself to itself for phenomenological analysis.[38]
At this juncture, Heidegger's philosophy of being-towards-death presents a criterion essential to gaining a full understanding of the phenomenon at hand; ownmost, non-relational and not to be outstripped. Ultimately, when I confront my own death, it is I and I alone who will die my death, no one can do it for me (ownmost), neither can my experience of death be shared by anyone as it is unique to me hence it is non-relational and finally, it cannot be outstripped in the fact that it that is an impending and inevitable given of one's existence.[40] For Dasein to confront life as its ownmost possibility which is non-relational and cannot be outstripped, is for it to acknowledge that there is no moment of its existence in which its being is not an issue; consequently this calls attention to the fact that life is something for which Dasein is solely responsible for.[41]
Essentially, Dasein is its possibilities, it's not-yets, and ultimately death is one of these future possibilities, in fact a certain one. Therefore, dying is not to be understood in the sense of an ending, more importantly is the attitude one adopts towards it in life; death is a way to be not a way to end. Heidegger's account of authentic being-in-the-world is principally one of 'freedom-towards-death', this shift in focus allows an individual to understand death from an existential perspective through which death is viewed as an inevitable and impending possibility for Dasein, not just an actuality on the distant horizon. 'We shall point to temporality as the meaning of the being of that entity which we call 'Dasein'.'[42]
Hence, an authentic relationship to death needs to be cultivated throughout ones' present existence, one in which the individual acknowledges the temporal finiteness of being-in-the-world along with the inevitably of their death, and as a consequence adopts to affirm their mortality in life immediately. Authentic being-towards-death is not a case of morbidly brooding over death or indeed dreading the occurrence of the event, rather it enables an individual to comport themselves towards one's ownmost potentiality-of-being.[43] In effect, death provides us with an existential awareness through which 'Dasein finds itself face to face with the 'nothing' of the possible impossibility of its existence. Being-towards-death is essentially anxiety.'[44] Once I die, I will no longer have my possibilities; all my choices will have been made, and the story of my life will be complete.
In the quest for authentic being-in-the-world it is via the experience of anxiety that Dasein is afforded the ability to phenomenologically examine and furthermore access its true nature concerning being-in-the-world. Crucially, Dasein's existence is temporally finite in that death is the ultimate horizon and backdrop via which Dasein can realise its totality. Through cultivating a complete awareness and understanding regarding the anxiety which surrounds the throwness, finiteness and nothingness of existence, Dasein can in turn endeavour to intentionally choose its path and achieve freedom-towards-death; ultimately realising an authentic existence of being-in-the-world.
